for many many years of my life
i was a writer and an editor
and many many people during those years
asked for my advice on how they could be
better writers
how they could rewrite and improve
specific books
specific stories specific chapters of
text whether that be
fiction or non-fiction and very often i
was paid
to that job then above and beyond that
people who were my friends or colleagues
or
acquaintances asked for that kind of
help with my writing
very often just because they had read
something i'd written and they regarded
me as an extraordinarily talented or
experienced
writer myself sometimes it was because
they knew i actually had professional
experience with both
writing and editing in the last five
years
quite unexpectedly from my perspective
writing ceased to be a significant part
of my life
editing other people's writing ceased to
be
an important part of life and instead
step by step
the format of the youtube video
especially
the youtube video monologue became my
main creative outlet became the way i
express my ideas to the world it's even
the main way i hear back from other
people about
their ideas about the world
nobody asks for my advice
on how they can make a better youtube
video nobody
i know now one interpretation of this
would be
well gee eisel maybe that's because you
were actually a talented writer and you
have no talent at all
for acting or performing or making
youtube maybe
that's that's one possibility but i have
another idea that cuts deeper
and i just mentioned these two these two
explanations actually are compatible
they're not mutually exclusive so if you
think i'm terrible at making youtube
videos or doing
monologues don't worry this this
analysis could work for you
making youtube videos many people
think of as something much more
immediate
much more intimate much more authentic
than professional writing writing for
publication
something separate from writing in a
diary writing for your own satisfaction
or writing a private letter
something that's only meant to be read
by one person this sort of thing
now i really felt the contrast when i
worked as a professional editor
the contrast between dealing with the
french
and dealing with any other culture of
people whether it be americans british
burmese thai chinese vietnamese
filipinos i dealt with
many many nationalities of author when i
was an editor
the french and the french alone
among all the cultures i dealt with they
had this powerful conviction
that whatever they wrote remained
a kind of testimony
as to the particular mood and particular
frame
of mind they happened to be in at the
time they wrote it it was
only the french whoever said to me when
i was in the role of a professional
editor
who said look i don't care if this is
right or if it's wrong
that was how i feel like well that's was
how i was feeling on that day when i
wrote it
that's how the text should stand
reflecting whatever i was going through
with from who that was it at that time
and it was only to the french that had
to say back look
this is a professional non-fiction
publishing house
we're not publishing your memoirs we're
not publishing your poetry
this is not about your feelings we're
doing the fact checking
and if the facts are wrong it's not
going to be published you know if there
are problems in the text
as an editor i'm going to solve them and
either you're going to address them or
your chapter is going to be deleted or
the page is going to be deleted whatever
it is
and i think what's really instructive
there is that that french attitude and
by the way i'm not claiming all
french people have this attitude but
obviously i was dealing with a certain
type of person who had a phd
or a high level of accomplishment within
technical area
you know this is not representative of
all people but these are the french
people i deal with his authors
that french attitude is much closer to
the attitude that most youtubers have
people who speak english language should
make youtube videos
they feel like the youtube video should
just record
however they were feeling in that
particular day they don't want to think
about the composition
of the youtube video as something they
cerebrally
rationally put together as a performance
for an audience right so they're
thinking of youtube videos
more like a diary or more like a private
personal letter
sent from one person to another or
they're even thinking of it like
security camera footage
right instead of thinking of it in the
same category as writing an essay
writing a book chapter writing something
for an audience that serves
something that really exists to
communicate to that audience so i think
this is actually the
deeper reason as to why nobody has ever
asked me
for advice on how to make a youtube
video or how to make their own youtube
videos
better i have never been asked for that
advice not even from other youtubers
whom i know have a lot of appreciation
for the videos on my channel who either
admire me as a person
or who really admire my videos or people
who've written into me saying
this video or that video changed their
life profoundly where they really are
fans of my content
so even even if my content is
objectively terrible
these are people who subjectively think
my videos real great
but they don't think to ask for my
advice
because they don't think of the
composition of youtube video as an act
of
authorship in that same sense they think
of it as this
spontaneous personal outpouring of
emotion or feelings or reflections and
capturing that particular moment
and interestingly in my experience
french authors
in particular feel that way too
sometimes
about the written word about publishing
essays book chapters
so on and so forth much younger youtuber
got started up called
ods he's a fan of the channel and i'm a
fan of his he made his first
youtube video sorry his first video in
english i should add
um talking about the ancient philosophy
of plato
as set down in the gorgeous and
watching that video immediately reminded
me of the advice that i've given to
aspiring authors
in the past when dealing with their
writing and of course it didn't remind
me of advice i've given on youtube
videos i haven't given any advice on
youtube videos in this sense
right so something i've done when
sitting down with authors
and talking about their manuscripts and
keep in mind a lot of these manuscripts
were maybe written first
as a phd thesis or some kind of academic
formal essay um i would always say to
them
what i'm trying to avoid here is a
narration
of generalities and we stop and think
about
a lot of academic writing is the
narration
of generalities you know if i would
sometimes ask them okay for in these
five pages
what are you doing here what's the point
of this text and someone said well
i'm trying to summarize this this and
say no
no summary we don't publish summaries so
if
it's a just delete that that's that's
not going to press
right so what's the point what are you
getting to and
very often in talking to the authors or
just in reading the text just inserting
that
you'd come to a point the text where
they they may say
out loud they may just say in the
writing this is really interesting
you know there's like a pause there's a
punctuation to stop and say wow
this is really interesting and i would
stop them and say to them hey
why isn't that the title of the article
or why isn't that the title of the
chapter
why didn't you write an article about
that get rid of the
summary get rid of the narration of
generalities if that's what's
interesting
that's what you want to write about and
then something i said again and again to
other writers was
think about your audience you're writing
this you're not writing this for
yourself
you're writing this to communicate to an
audience so you have to tell them
this is what i'm going to tell you this
is why i'm telling you and now this is
why it matters
a brief digression here i'm going to
come back to ods in his video about
about plato
there are some topics i would say
especially when you are debunking a
misconception
when the answer to those three or four
questions is implicitly
obvious right um so
let's say you do a video on how the
americans won
in world war ii you don't sorry
specifically how the americans beat the
japanese
in world war ii okay you probably do not
have to explain to your audience
that world war ii is an important event
or that's an important question
and you may be able to just in a single
sentence communicate the fact
most people assume that the invention of
the atom bomb
nuclear weapons that that was the
crucial
factor that allowed the united states to
defeat japan
in world war ii but i'm going to debunk
that notion
i'm going to tell you that this is what
really mattered instead that there's
something else there's a different
fact of the message so when you have
that format when you have a debunking
format debunking a misconception about
something where the audience
already knows why it's important that
makes you
unaware of the obligation of the author
or the creative artist or
actor or performer here on youtube to
explain to the audience hey
this is what i'm telling you about today
this is
why it matters etc etc to really go over
those
those bases so you can imagine by
contrast there's a huge burden for me to
explain to you
why it matters and why you should be
interested if even just by contrast i'm
going to tell you about what happened in
cambodia
during world war ii like hey did you
know whether it's cambodia or maybe
myanmar
there's this whole other history of what
happened in world war ii
in cambodia there's this whole other
history of what happened in myanmar and
of course it wasn't decisive for
the beginning middle or end of world war
ii but it's interesting or important in
some other sense that i have to get
across you i have to tell you
why i'm telling this to you what i'm
going to prove
in plain english you have to explain to
the audience
what is the point and again
the greatest enemy of having a point
is the narration of generalities the
greatest
enemy of having a point is a summary
right and that's very counterintuitive
even those two examples you might think
well okay the way to do that video is to
start by giving a summary
of what happened in world war ii whether
it's in japan or cambodia or or
myanmar no right that's a waste of
everyone's time
including your own right so discarding
the summary
mindset disc discarding the narration of
generalities
mindset no there's a specific question
that i'm going to answer
here's what the question is here's what
i'm telling you here's why i'm telling
you
here's and here's the answer right
problem and problem solving
you know and if there are many problems
you should have many
chapters or possibly many separate books
depending on many essays whatever it is
right but to start thinking in these
terms this is what's going to make your
writing
accessible and interesting and this is
what's going to make your
youtube videos accessible and
interesting because ultimately
it's making your communication of ideas
functional
it's making it outcome driven instead of
being
narration of generalities instead of
thought of in terms of telling a story
that existed
in your imagination before you came here
to tell it
that's the wrong way to think where
you're narrating or summarizing someone
else's story
no you're starting from a blank piece of
paper
and you're telling a story no one's ever
heard before because it's your story
that you've made up starting from a
blank piece of paper
like my specific thesis about why
america beat japan in world war ii
that's a new story
that's something you have something you
even thought of before and it's maybe
something
you didn't even realize you were
interested in until i pointed it out to
you hey you assumed it's because of the
atom bomb
it's not really it's not as important as
there are these other factors you don't
know about okay
now you're interested now you're on my
pitch and if you're not interested you
know you'll click on another youtube
video
or you wouldn't read that book you
wouldn't read that paper what have you
so when i'm watching this video by
ods again much younger guy he's just
getting started making youtube videos
right he's doing a narration of
generalities
he's giving a summary he's basically
just summarizing this text from plato
and narrating
this text in general terms what happens
and i would say at
three points maybe at four points
he stops and he kind of dramatically
pauses and even looks at the camera
and he says more or less plainly
this is really interesting this is
really important
right that should be the video
that that moment should have been when
you start the video that should be the
topic of the video it could be three
separate videos could be four seven
videos
right everything everything that's gonna
go that point
and you should tell me why it's
interesting and that's you gotta make a
make a video about
so to give an example one portion of the
video he's going on and on
narrative narrative narrative summary
summary summary
and then he stops and you can actually
feel the dramatic tension in his voice
when he reads out a passage where
socrates kind of turns a corner
and socrates says hey you know what
he thinks of himself not merely as a
politician
and not merely as a great politician but
as the only
true politician in the whole history of
athens that all the other politicians
are frauds
that only socrates is a real political
leader of politician
and you know you could see this this
young guy ods
this is a big deal this is interesting
and you just briefly comments you know
this might relate to some other issues
and some other texts where
socrates is a little bit of that's a
topic for a video
all right now what's the hook
people say socrates
was a philosopher
he thought of himself as a politician
and he thought of himself as the only
true politician and all the other
politicians are frauds
now i'm interested now you've got a
story to tell and it's your story
it's your narrative it's not somewhere
so it's not summarizing what the text
already says
it's not narrating in more general terms
what the text says
right that's your story because you
picked it out you noticed it you reacted
to it
and you could even start by saying how
that made you feel that's a great way to
start a youtube video
you could start the youtube video saying
hypothetically you know i was always
told that socrates was a philosopher
i was told that he talked about the
meaning of life and he talked about
religion
and he talked about duty and honoring
your prayer i was i was given this
vision of socrates as a man who suffered
for philosophy and died for the lesson i
thought it was quite a passive character
i thought of him as someone who had
nothing to do with politics someone who
just stood there in the marketplace and
kind of chit-chatted with people and
you know i had this idea of socrates
from school and you know what when i
came to this point when i was reading
this text by plato
i suddenly realized just how wrong all
that was that
this guy really was a political
philosopher now this links to another
another point in the in the specific
text repeatedly
socrates makes this joke he's talking to
his his enemy or his opponent
and he says you love the demos
which is a play on words meaning the
people in general and there's also a
particular guy
named dennis and and socrates says
himself whereas i
love alcibiades right
and this is linked to what he's saying
about his political program
alki biatis was a political leader
including a military leader
and he was very specifically the
political leader and military leader
that socrates groomed to take over
government to take
leadership of athens right so this whole
notion we have of socrates as this kind
of passive man of peace
uh hippie wearing sandals who just hung
out in the marketplace and ask people
witty questions and referee and pick
their brains there's all this crap
people say about socrates if he was he
was like a stand-up comedian
or i've even heard someone say he was
the original internet troll that he was
just stimulating people this way
the image of the gap like no this is
telling you
in a stone-cold serious manner that
socrates is in his way a political
radical or revolutionary and it's also
very shocking if you take the time to
unpack it the fact that he has
no respect at all for these other
political leaders who are named from
that era
of athens and from decades and centuries
before
did he say no these other guys you
worship as having been like the winston
churchill
of your society or as having been the
abraham lincoln ever said i regard all
those guys as a fraud
and he says that he only regards himself
as
so now we're going to talk back this is
my ultimate point
really what i'm presenting here isn't
even my opinion
of what that youtube video should be and
you could say this also about an essay
you know a book chapter whatever it
might be if you just watch that video by
ods and you pay attention to the moments
where he stops and he says in effect hey
this is really interesting this is
surprising to me
you can hear in his voice see what he
says you can
actually just present an analysis of
that video
and those moments of tension within it
already emerge and show you what even
from his perspective not from my
perspective but from the greatest
the creative artist's own perspective
what that video
could or should be